

Economic, health and geopolitical trends have created divergent outcomes for labour markets globally in 2023. While tight labour markets are prevalent in high-income countries, low- and lower-middle-income countries continue to see higher unemployment than before the COVID-19 pandemic. On an individual level, labour-market outcomes are also diverging, as workers with only basic education and women face lower employment levels. At the same time, real wages are declining as a result of an ongoing cost-ofliving crisis, and changing worker expectations and concerns about the quality of work are becoming more prominent issues globally.

As tendências econômicas, de saúde e geopolíticas criou resultados divergentes para os mercados de trabalho globalmente em 2023. Enquanto os mercados de trabalho apertados estão prevalente em países de alta renda, baixa e países de renda média-baixa continuam a ver desemprego mais alto do que antes do COVID-19 pandemia. A nível individual, o mercado de trabalho resultados também são divergentes, pois trabalhadores com apenas educação básica e as mulheres enfrentam níveis de emprego. Ao mesmo tempo, os salários reais estão diminuindo como resultado de um custo de vida contínuo crise, e mudando as expectativas dos trabalhadores e preocupações com a qualidade do trabalho estão se tornando questões mais proeminentes globalmente.







The fourth edition of the Survey has the widest
coverage thus far by topic, geography and
sector. The Future of Jobs Survey brings together
the perspective of 803 companies – collectively
employing more than 11.3 million workers – across
27 industry clusters and 45 economies from all
world regions. The Survey covers questions of
macrotrends and technology trends, their impact
on jobs, their impact on skills, and the workforce
transformation strategies businesses plan to use,
across the 2023-2027 timeframe.

Technology adoption will remain a key driver
of business transformation in the next five
years. Over 85% of organizations surveyed
identify increased adoption of new and frontier
technologies and broadening digital access as the
trends most likely to drive transformation in their
organization. Broader application of Environmental,
Social and Governance (ESG) standards within
their organizations will also have a significant
impact. The next most-impactful trends are
macroeconomic: the rising cost of living and slow
economic growth. The impact of investments to
drive the green transition was judged to be the
sixth-most impactful macrotrend, followed by
supply shortages and consumer expectations
around social and environmental issues. Though
still expected to drive the transformation of
almost half of companies in the next five years,
the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic,
increased geopolitical divisions and demographic
dividends in developing and emerging economies
were ranked lower as drivers of business evolution
by respondents

The largest job creation and destruction effects
come from environmental, technology and
economic trends. Among the macrotrends listed,
businesses predict the strongest net job-creation
effect to be driven by investments that facilitate
the green transition of businesses, the broader
application of ESG standards and supply chains
becoming more localized, albeit with job growth
offset by partial job displacement in each case.
Climate change adaptation and the demographic
dividend in developing and emerging economies
also rate high as net job creators. Technological
advancement through increased adoption of
new and frontier technologies and increased
digital access are expected to drive job growth
in more than half of surveyed companies, offset
by expected job displacement in one-fifth of
companies. The net job creation effect places these
two trends in 6th and 8th place respectively. The
three key drivers of expected net job destruction
are slower economic growth, supply shortages
and the rising cost of inputs, and the rising cost of
living for consumers. Employers also recognize that
increased geopolitical divisions and the ongoing
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic will drive labourmarket
disruption – with an even split between
employers who expect these trends to have a
positive impact and employers who expect them to
have a negative impact on jobs.

Within technology adoption, big data, cloud
computing and AI feature highly on likelihood of
adoption. More than 75% of companies are looking
to adopt these technologies in the next five years.
The data also shows the impact of the digitalization
of commerce and trade. Digital platforms and apps
are the technologies most likely to be adopted by
the organizations surveyed, with 86% of companies
expecting to incorporate them into their operations
in the next five years. E-commerce and digital trade
are expected to be adopted by 75% of businesses.
The second-ranked technology encompasses
education and workforce technologies, with 81%
of companies looking to adopt these technologies
by 2027. The adoption of robots, power storage
technology and distributed ledger technologies rank
lower on the list.

The impact of most technologies on jobs is
expected to be a net positive over the next
five years. Big data analytics, climate change
Key findings
May 2023 Future of Jobs Report 2023
Future of Jobs Report 2023 5
and environmental management technologies,
and encryption and cybersecurity are expected
to be the biggest drivers of job growth.
Agriculture technologies, digital platforms and
apps, e-commerce and digital trade, and AI
are all expected to result in significant labourmarket
disruption, with substantial proportions of
companies forecasting job displacement in their
organizations, offset by job growth elsewhere to
result in a net positive. All but two technologies
are expected to be net job creators in the next five
years: humanoid robots and non-humanoid robots.

Employers anticipate a structural labour market
churn of 23% of jobs in the next five years. This
can be interpreted as an aggregate measure of
disruption, constituting a mixture of emerging jobs
added and declining jobs eliminated. Respondents
to this year’s Future of Jobs Survey expect a
higher-than-average churn in the Supply Chain
and Transportation and Media, Entertainment and
Sports industries, and lower-than-average churn
in Manufacturing as well as Retail and Wholesale
of Consumer Goods. Of the 673 million jobs
reflected in the dataset in this report, respondents
expect structural job growth of 69 million jobs and
a decline of 83 million jobs. This corresponds to a
net decrease of 14 million jobs, or 2% of current
employment.

The human-machine frontier has shifted, with
businesses introducing automation into their
operations at a slower pace than previously
anticipated. Organizations today estimate that
34% of all business-related tasks are performed by
machines, with the remaining 66% performed by
humans. This represents a negligible 1% increase
in the level of automation that was estimated by
respondents to the 2020 edition of the Future of
Jobs Survey. This pace of automation contradicts
expectations from 2020 survey respondents
that almost half (47%) of business tasks would
be automated in the following five years. Today,
respondents have revised down their expectations
for future automation to predict that 42% of
business tasks will be automated by 2027. Task
automation in 2027 is expected to vary from 35%
of reasoning and decision-making to 65% of
information and data processing.

But while expectations of the displacement of
physical and manual work by machines has
decreased, reasoning, communicating and
coordinating – all traits with a comparative
advantage for humans – are expected to be more
automatable in the future. Artificial intelligence, a
key driver of potential algorithmic displacement, is
expected to be adopted by nearly 75% of surveyed
companies and is expected to lead to high churn –
with 50% of organizations expecting it to create job
growth and 25% expecting it to create job losses.

The combination of macrotrends and
technology adoption will drive specific areas of
job growth and decline:

The fastest-growing roles relative to
their size today are driven by technology,
digitalization and sustainability. The majority
of the fastest growing roles are technologyrelated
roles. AI and Machine Learning
Specialists top the list of fast-growing jobs,
followed by Sustainability Specialists, Business
Intelligence Analysts and Information Security
Analysts. Renewable Energy Engineers, and
Solar Energy Installation and System Engineers
are relatively fast-growing roles, as economies
shift towards renewable energy.
– The fastest-declining roles relative to their
size today are driven by technology and
digitalization. The majority of fastest declining
roles are clerical or secretarial roles, with Bank
Tellers and Related Clerks, Postal Service
Clerks, Cashiers and Ticket Clerks, and Data
Entry Clerks expected to decline fastest.
– Large-scale job growth is expected in
education, agriculture and digital commerce
and trade. Jobs in the Education industry are
expected to grow by about 10%, leading to 3
million additional jobs for Vocational Education
Teachers and University and Higher education
Teachers. Jobs for agricultural professionals,
especially Agricultural Equipment Operators, are
expected to see an increase of around 30%,
leading to an additional 3 million jobs. Growth
is forecast in approximately 4 million digitallyenabled
roles, such as E-Commerce Specialists,
Digital Transformation Specialists, and Digital
Marketing and Strategy Specialists.
– The largest losses are expected in
administrative roles and in traditional
security, factory and commerce roles.
Surveyed organizations predict 26 million
fewer jobs by 2027 in Record-Keeping and
Administrative roles, including Cashiers
and Ticket Clerks; Data Entry, Accounting,
Bookkeeping and Payroll Clerks; and
Administrative and Executive Secretaries, driven
mainly by digitalization and automation.
– Analytical thinking and creative thinking
remain the most important skills for workers
in 2023. Analytical thinking is considered a core
skill by more companies than any other skill
and constitutes, on average, 9% of the core
skills reported by companies. Creative thinking,
another cognitive skill, ranks second, ahead of
three self-efficacy skills – resilience, flexibility
and agility; motivation and self-awareness; and
curiosity and lifelong learning – in recognition
of the importance of workers ability to adapt
to disrupted workplaces. Dependability
and attention to detail, ranks sixth, behind
technological literacy. The core skills top 10 is
completed by two attitudes relating to working
with others – empathy and active listening and
leadership and social influence – as well as
quality control.

mployers estimate that 44% of workers’ skills
will be disrupted in the next five years. Cognitive
skills are reported to be growing in importance
most quickly, reflecting the increasing importance
of complex problem-solving in the workplace.
Surveyed businesses report creative thinking to
be growing in importance slightly more rapidly
than analytical thinking. Technology literacy is
the third-fastest growing core skill. Self-efficacy
skills rank above working with others, in the rate
of increase in importance of skills reported by
businesses. The socio-emotional attitudes which
businesses consider to be growing in importance
most quickly are curiosity and lifelong learning;
resilience, flexibility and agility; and motivation and
self-awareness. Systems thinking, AI and big data,
talent management, and service orientation and
customer service complete the top 10 growing
skills. While respondents judged no skills to be
in net decline, sizable minorities of companies
judge reading, writing and mathematics; global
citizenship; sensory-processing abilities; and
manual dexterity, endurance and precision to be of
declining importance for their workers.
Six in 10 workers will require training before
2027, but only half of workers are seen to have
access to adequate training opportunities
today. The highest priority for skills training from
2023-2027 is analytical thinking, which is set to
account for 10% of training initiatives, on average.
The second priority for workforce development is to
promote creative thinking, which will be the subject
of 8% of upskilling initiatives. Training workers to
utilize AI and big data ranks third among company
skills-training priorities in the next five years and
will be prioritized by 42% of surveyed companies.
Employers also plan to focus on developing
worker’s skills in leadership and social influence
(40% of companies); resilience, flexibility and agility
(32%); and curiosity and lifelong learning (30%).
Two-thirds of companies expect to see a return
on investment on skills training within a year of
the investment, whether in the form of enhanced
cross-role mobility, increased worker satisfaction or
enhanced worker productivity.
The skills that companies report to be
increasing in importance the fastest are
not always reflected in corporate upskilling
strategies. Beyond the top-ranked cognitive skills
are two skills which companies prioritize much more
highly than would appear according to their current
importance to their workforce: AI and big data as
well as leadership and social influence. Companies
rank AI and big data 12 places higher in their skills
strategies than in their evaluation of core skills, and
report that they will invest an estimated 9% of their
reskilling efforts in it – a greater proportion than the
more highly-ranked creative thinking, indicating that
though AI and big data is part of fewer strategies,
it tends to be a more important element when it
is included. Leadership and social influence ranks
five places higher than suggested by its current
importance and is the highest ranked attitude.
Other skills which are strategically emphasized
by business are design and user experience (nine
places higher), environmental stewardship (10
places higher), marketing and media (six places
higher) and networks and cybersecurity (five places
higher).
Respondents express confidence in developing
their existing workforce, however, they are
less optimistic regarding the outlook for talent
availability in the next five years. Accordingly,
organizations identify skills gaps and an inability
to attract talent as the key barriers preventing
industry transformation. In response 48% of
companies identify improving talent progression and
promotion processes as a key business practice
that can increase the availability of talent to their
organization, ahead of offering higher wages (36%)
and offering effective reskilling and upskilling (34%).
Surveyed companies report that investing in
learning and on-the-job training and automating
processes are the most common workforce
strategies which will be adopted to deliver
their organizations’ business goals. Four in five
respondents expect to implement these strategies
in the next five years. Workforce development is
most commonly considered to be the responsibility
of workers and managers, with 27% of training
expected to be furnished by on-the-job training and
coaching, ahead of the 23% by internal training
departments and the 16% by employer-sponsored
apprenticeships. To caining solutions in favour
of company-led initiatives.

A majority of companies will prioritize women
(79%), youth under 25 (68%) and those
with disabilities (51%) as part of their DEI
programmes. A minority will prioritize those from a
disadvantaged religious, ethnic or racial background
(39%), workers over age 55 (36%), those who
identify as LGBTQI+ (35%) and those from a lowincome
background (33%).
Forty-five percent of businesses see funding
for skills training as an effective intervention
available to governments seeking to connect
talent to employment. Funding for skills training
ranks ahead of flexibility on hiring and firing
practices (33%), tax and other incentives for
companies to improve wages (33%), improvements
to school systems (31%) and changes to
immigration laws on foreign talent (28%).



















