The findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect 
the views of the World Economic Forum. The report 
presents information and data that were compiled 
and/or collected by the World Economic Forum 
(all information and data referred herein as “Data”). 
Data in this report is subject to change without 
notice. The terms country and nation as used in 
this report do not in all cases refer to a territorial 
entity that is a state as understood by international 
law and practice. The terms cover well-defined, 
geographically self-contained economic areas that 
may not be states but for which statistical data are 
maintained on a separate and independent basis. 
Although the World Economic Forum takes every 
reasonable step to ensure that the data thus 
compiled and/or collected is accurately reflected 
in this report, the World Economic Forum, its 
agents, officers and employees: (i) provide the data 
“as is, as available” and without warranty of any 
kind, either express or implied, including, without 
limitation, warranties of merchantability, fitness 
for a particular purpose and non-infringement; (ii) 
make no representations, express or implied, as to 
the accuracy of the data contained in this report or 
its suitability for any particular purpose; (iii) accept 
no liability for any use of the said data or reliance 
placed on it, in particular, for any interpretation, 
decisions, or actions based on the data in this 
report. Other parties may have ownership interests 
in some of the data contained in this report. The 
World Economic Forum in no way represents or 
warrants that it owns or controls all rights in all data, 
and the World Economic Forum will not be liable to 
users for any claims brought against users by third 
parties in connection with their use of any data. 
The World Economic Forum, its agents, officers 
and employees do not endorse or in any respect 
warrant any third-party products or services by 
virtue of any data, material or content referred to 
or included in this report. Users shall not infringe 
upon the integrity of the data and in particular 
shall refrain from any act of alteration of the data 
that intentionally affects its nature or accuracy. If 
the data is materially transformed by the user, this 
must be stated explicitly along with the required 
source citation. For data compiled by parties other 
than the World Economic Forum, users must 
refer to these parties’ terms of use, in particular 
concerning the attribution, distribution, and 
reproduction of the data. When data for which the 
World Economic Forum is the source (herein “World 
Economic Forum”), is distributed or reproduced, 
it must appear accurately and be attributed to the 
World Economic Forum. This source attribution 
requirement is attached to any use of data, whether 
obtained directly from the World Economic Forum 
or from a user. Users who make World Economic 
Forum data available to other users through any 
type of distribution or download environment agree 
to make reasonable efforts to communicate and 
promote compliance by their end users with these 
terms. Users who intend to sell World Economic 
Forum data as part of a database or as a stand-
alone product must first obtain the permission from 
the World Economic Forum (CNES@weforum.org).
Future of Jobs Report 2023 2


As afirmações, interpretações e conclusões
expressas neste trabalho não refletem necessariamente
as opiniões do Fórum Econômico Mundial. 
Apresentam informações e dados que foram compilados
e/ou coletados pelo Fórum Econômico Mundial
(informações e dados aqui referidos como “Dados”).
Estão sujeitos a alterações sem prévio aviso. 
Os termos país e nação usados ​​neste relatório nem sempre se referem a um território
entidade que é um estado conforme entendido pela
lei e prática. Os termos cobrem bem definidos,
áreas econômicas geograficamente autocontidas que
podem não ser estados, mas para os quais os dados estatísticos são
mantidos de forma separada e independente.

